Document how to update toolchains for existing easyconfigs (#288)
easybuilders/easybuild-docs: docs/writing-easyconfig-files.md

Usually when using a newer toolchain you also want to use newer versions of (at least) the dependencies.
Often there are already at least easyconfigs available for the dependencies in the new toolchain,
and especially if those are already installed you should use those as dependencies for the updated easyconfig.

So the process of updating an easyconfig to a newer toolchain version could look like:

1. Copy the easyconfig and change the toolchain version
1. Usually, especially when updating to the latest toolchain,
   you should search for the most recent version of the software too and use that.
1. For each listed dependency find the easyconfig for the new toolchain version.
   Here you need to take [toolchain hierarchy](common-toolchains.md#toolchains_diagram) into account.
   I.e. a dependency of an easyconfig for the `foss` toolchain might use the `GCC` or `GCCcore` toolchain.
   Check the toolchain easyconfig file (e.g. `foss-2023b.eb`) to find the versions of the sub-toolchain.
   For very recent toolchains you can also check the `develop` branch of the [easyconfigs git repository](https://github.com/easybuilders/easybuild-easyconfigs) and open PRs.

> 1. If an easyconfig of the dependency for the new toolchain already exists use its version in your new easyconfig.
>    Otherwise, you need to create a new easyconfig for the new toolchain version based on that of another toolchain version.
>    The steps are the same and need to also be repeated for each dependency of this dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If an easyconfig for the listed dependency with the new toolchain already exists use its version in your new easyconfig.
   Otherwise, you need to create a new easyconfig for the listed dependency with the new toolchain version (based on that of another toolchain version).
   The steps are the same and also need to be repeated for each dependency of this dependency.
```

1. Finally, build and test your easyconfig and consider [contributing](contributing.md#contributing-easyconfig-files--contributing_easyconfigs) it.

Especially when creating easyconfigs for dependencies it is a good idea to put all of them into a new folder.

> To allow EasyBuild to find those, pass its path via `easybuild --robot <path>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow EasyBuild to find these easyconfigs in your folder, pass its path via `eb --robot <path> ...`.
```

This manual process can be partially automated:

1. Create a new folder for the new easyconfig and its dependencies.

> 1. Run `easybuild <current_easyconfig.eb> --try-toolchain-version=<new-version> --try-update-deps --copy-ec <folder>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run `eb <current_easyconfig.eb> --try-toolchain-version=<new-version> --try-update-deps --experimental --copy-ec <folder>`.
```
the `--experimental` flag is still required for `--try-update-deps`

   This will update the toolchain version, search for the versions of dependencies in the new toolchain and use them if available.

>    If a dependency for then new toolchain is not available this will create a new easyconfig for this toolchain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If a dependency with the new toolchain is not available this will create a new easyconfig for this toolchain
```

   based on an existing one for another toolchain (version).
   All newly create easyconfigs will be copied to the specified folder.
1. Optionally, but recommended, update the version of the software for each created easyconfig to the latest available one.
1. **Important**: Verify the newly created easyconfigs by comparing each of them against the existing one for that software.
   Only the version of the software, toolchain and dependencies should have been changed.

>    EasyBuild often replaces local variables or templates by their value when updating easyconfigs.

Reviewer 2: I didn't understand that sentence at first, but I guess I experienced the "replacement of local variables with their value" when I ran 

`eb --try-update-deps --experimental --try-toolchain=foss,2024a snakemake-8.4.2-foss-2023a.eb`

And I got
```
    ('snakemake', '8.4.2', {'checksums': ['ea9273d7a27706b635fafae87bb21100dad02275570e138fdcff125cb3cba4f4']}),
```
in `snakemake-8.4.2-foss-2024a.eb` instead of
```
    (name, version, {'checksums': ['ea9273d7a27706b635fafae87bb21100dad02275570e138fdcff125cb3cba4f4']}),
```

Author: Yes that is exactly the issue. Any idea for making this clearer without being overly verbose?

   It might be easier to use those easyconfigs just for getting the versions of each dependency required
   and still copy & update the easyconfigs from existing ones manually.

When updating a software version the patches in the easyconfig need to be checked too.
If they don't apply they might not be required anymore, when the upstream software fixed the issue, and can be removed.
Otherwise, they need to be adjusted for the changes in the source code.

For updates to easyconfigs containing Python packages (`PythonBundle`) you should check each of them if there is a newer version and if it is still required.
The latest version of a single Python package can usually be found on [PyPI](https://pypi.org).

> To find the list of Python dependencies for another Python package to be installed by an easyconfig you can use the `findPythonDeps` script

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add more info on actually run `findPythonDeps`?

I got the following from @ocaisa which was very useful in my case :

`$(dirname $(which eb))/../easybuild/scripts/findPythonDeps.py --ec snakemake-8.4.2-foss-2024a.eb snakemake==8.27.0`

Reviewer 2: Sorry. I often find documentation hard to follow. (Typically examples on Slack work much better for me.) I searched for `findPythonDeps` and `EasyBuild` on google, and the took me to 

https://docs.easybuild.io/api/easybuild/scripts/findPythonDeps/

but from the sparse documentation on that page, there is no way I would be able to come up with `$(dirname $(which eb))/../easybuild/scripts/findPythonDeps.py --ec snakemake-8.4.2-foss-2024a.eb snakemake==8.27.0`. I mean I wouldn't even know where to look for the script `findPythonDeps.py` as it is not on the `PATH` (at least not on my system).

Reviewer: I agree that the script is not easy to find (it also took me a while yesterday). In an ideal world we'd have an environment variable that defined the location of the scripts, but that doesn't cover the scenario where someone has installed EasyBuild via pip...what I gave was the best I could come up with that _might_ be universal

Author: I see. Added that and opened another PR to improve that docs site

Especially when creating easyconfigs for dependencies it is a good idea to put all of them into a new folder.
To allow EasyBuild to find these easyconfigs in your folder, pass its path via `eb --robot <path> ...`.

This manual process can be partially automated:

1. Create a new folder for the new easyconfig and its dependencies.
1. Run `eb <current_easyconfig.eb> --try-toolchain-version=<new-version> --try-update-deps --experimental --copy-ec <folder>`.
   This will update the toolchain version, search for the versions of dependencies in the new toolchain and use them if available.
   If a dependency with the new toolchain is not available this will create a new easyconfig for this toolchain
   based on an existing one for another toolchain (version).
   All newly create easyconfigs will be copied to the specified folder.
1. Optionally, but recommended, update the version of the software for each created easyconfig to the latest available one.
1. **Important**: Verify the newly created easyconfigs by comparing each of them against the existing one for that software.

>    Only the version of the software, toolchain and dependencies should have been changed.
>    EasyBuild often replaces local variables or templates like `name` or `%(version)s` by their value when updating easyconfigs.
>    This is undesirable as the values might become out of sync with what they are supposed to be, e.g. after changing the version variable.
>    It might be easier to use those easyconfigs just for getting the versions of each dependency required
>    and still copy & update the easyconfigs from existing ones manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Only the version of the software, toolchain and dependencies should have been changed. However, this approach
   can lead to unwanted changes to formatting as well as the replacement local variables or templates (such as `name`,
   `version` or `%(version)s`) by their _value_ when updating easyconfigs.
   This is undesirable as the values might become out of sync with what they are supposed to be, e.g. when we update
   the `version` variable the old _value_ may still exist elsewhere in the easyconfig.
   Depending on the situation, it might be easier to use the newly created easyconfigs just for getting the versions of
   each dependency required and still copy & update the easyconfigs from existing ones manually.
```
